update plotting with dataset (#18)
duke-malaria-collaboratory/DiscovR: _episodes_rmd/02-r-plotting.Rmd

>
{: .callout}

> Okay, now let's read in our data, smoking_cancer_1990.csv, which is in the data folder in our project directory. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Okay, now let's read in our data, "smoking_cancer_1990.csv", which is in the data folder in our project directory. 
```

object:

```{r FirstPlotAddPoints}
ggplot(data = smoking_1990) +
  aes(x = smoke_pct) +
  labs(x = "Percent of people who smoke") +
  aes(y = lung_cancer_pct) +
  labs(y = "Percent of people with lung cancer") +
  geom_point()
```

Now we're really getting somewhere. It finally looks like a proper plot!  We can

> now see a trend in the data. It looks like countries with greater smoking rates tend to have higher lung cancer rates. Let's add a title to our plot to make that

Reviewer: Maybe somewhere we should add a disclaimer about why we can't infer causality from this?

  labs(x = "Percent of people who smoke") +
  aes(y = lung_cancer_pct) +
  labs(y = "Percent of people with lung cancer") +
  geom_point() +
  labs(title = "Are lung cancer rates associated with smoking rates?")
```

No one can deny we've made a very handsome plot! We can immediately see that there is a positive association between lung cancer rates and smoking rates.
But now looking at the data, we
might be curious about learning more about the points that are the extremes of
the data. We know that we have two more pieces of data in the `smoking_1990`
object that we haven't used yet. Maybe we are curious if the different
continents show different patterns in smoking rates and lung cancer rates. One thing we
could do is use a different color for each of the continents. To map the
continent of each point to a color, we will again use the `aes()` function:

```{r FirstPlotAddColor}
ggplot(data = smoking_1990) +
  aes(x = smoke_pct) +
  labs(x = "Percent of people who smoke") +
  aes(y = lung_cancer_pct) +
  labs(y = "Percent of people with lung cancer") +
  geom_point() +
  labs(title = "Are lung cancer rates associated with smoking rates?") +
  aes(color = continent)
```

> Here we can see that in 1990 the African countries tended to have much smoking and lung cancer rates than many other continents. Notice that when we add a mapping for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here we can see that in 1990 the African countries tended to have much lower smoking and lung cancer rates than many other continents. Notice that when we add a mapping for
```

> > Here's an example:
> > 
> > ```{r Color}
> > #install.packages("ggsci")
> > library(ggsci)
> > ggplot(data = smoking_1990) +
> >   aes(x = smoke_pct) +
> >   labs(x = "Percent of people who smoke") +
> >   aes(y = lung_cancer_pct) +
> >   labs(y = "Percent of people with lung cancer") +
> >   geom_point() +
> >   labs(title = "Are lung cancer rates associated with smoking rates?") +
> >   aes(color = continent) +

> > >   scale_color_locuszoom()

Reviewer: For some reason I can't get the correct colors to render using this function :( Maybe we can try a different one?

> > ```
> > {: .source}
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

Since we have the data for the population of each country, we might be curious

> what effect population might have on smoking rates and lung cancer rates. Do you

Reviewer: ```suggestion
about the relationship between population, smoking rates, and lung cancer rates. Do you
```

> think larger countries will have a greater or lower lung cancer rates? Let's find

Reviewer: ```suggestion
think larger countries will have a greater or lower lung cancer rate? Let's find
```

> > ## Solution
> > You'll want to use the `aes` aesthetic function to change the size:
> > ```{r Pop}
> > ggplot(data = smoking_1990) +
> >   aes(x = smoke_pct) +
> >   labs(x = "Percent of people who smoke") +
> >   aes(y = lung_cancer_pct) +
> >   labs(y = "Percent of people with lung cancer") +
> >   geom_point() +
> >   labs(title = "Are lung cancer rates associated with smoking rates?") +
> >   aes(color = continent) +
> >   scale_color_brewer(palette = "Set2") +
> >   aes(size = pop)

> > ```
> > {: .source}
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

> There doesn't seem to be a very strong association with population size. We got another legend here for size,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There doesn't seem to be a very strong association with population size. We also got another legend here for size,
```

which is nice, but the values look a bit ugly in scientific notation. Let's
divide all the values by 1,000,000 and label our legend "Population (in
millions)"

```{r FirstPlotAddPop}
ggplot(data = smoking_1990) +
  aes(x = smoke_pct) +
  labs(x = "Percent of people who smoke") +
  aes(y = lung_cancer_pct) +
  labs(y = "Percent of people with lung cancer") +
  geom_point() +
  labs(title = "Are lung cancer rates associated with smoking rates?") +
  aes(color = continent) +
  scale_color_brewer(palette = "Set2") +
  aes(size = pop/1000000) +
  labs(size = "Population (in millions)")

> 

Reviewer: I feel like it'd be good to manifest somewhere in the lesson the hanging code in the console (i.e. including a `+` at the end of the code) - maybe a good place would be somewhere in here?

Author: I put this in the Bug exercise as the last one.

together. A more condensed version of the exact same plot would look like this:

```{r FirstPlotCondensed}
ggplot(data = smoking_1990) +
  aes(x = smoke_pct, y = lung_cancer_pct, color = continent, size = pop/1000000) +
  geom_point() +
  scale_color_brewer(palette = "Set2") +
  labs(x = "Percent of people who smoke", y = "Percent of people with lung cancer",
    title = "Are lung cancer rates associated with smoking rates?", size = "Population (in millions)")
```

> ## Storing our plot
> We learned about how to save things to object names in the previous lesson. 

> > We can do the same thing with plots! Store our final plot in an object called `cancer_v_smoke`.

Reviewer: Minor detail, but I would have put `smoke_v_cancer` (x vs y)- not sure one is correct/better, but curious why you chose this way?

Author: I learned to name plots dependent variable vs independent variable. I know that doesn't translate perfectly here, but that's why I named it y vs x.

I guess it applies more in lab sciences when you're taking measurements. For example, I would name a plot "signal vs. time," but not "time vs. signal."

Let me know if you want me to change it!

> > ```{r plotErrors, eval = FALSE}

Reviewer: Above here, should change errors to bugs since the 1st bug doesn't return an error? Doesn't really matter to me, but just had that though

> # Bug 1
> 
> ggplot(data = smoking_1990) +
>  aes(x = "smoke_pct", y = lung_cancer_pct, color = continent, size = pop/1000000) +
>  geom_point() +
>  scale_color_brewer(palette = "Set2") +
>  labs(x = "Percent of people who smoke", y = "Percent of people with lung cancer", title = "Are lung cancer rates associated with smoking rates?", size = "Population (in millions)")
> 
># Bug 2
> 
> ggplot(data = smoking_1990) +
>  aes(x = smoke_pct, y = lung_cancer_pct, color = continent, size = pop/1000000) +
>  geom_point() +
>  scale_color_brewer(palette = "Set2") +
>  labs(x = "Percent of people who smoke", y = "Percent of people with lung cancer", title = "Are lung cancer rates associated with smoking rates?", size = "Population (in millions)"))
>
># Bug 3
> 
> ggplot(data = smoking_1990) +
>  aes(x = smoke_pct, color = continent, size = pop/1000000) +
>  geom_point() +
>  scale_color_brewer(palette = "Set2") +
>  labs(x = "Percent of people who smoke", y = "Percent of people with lung cancer", title = "Are lung cancer rates associated with smoking rates?", size = "Population (in millions)")
>

> > ```

Reviewer: I thought of another bug: missing a comma - maybe add that one in too?

Not sure how many is too many, but could include a couple as bonus if they finish the other ones quickly

> What argument should be provided in the below code to read in the full dataset?
>
> ```{r ImportFullData, eval = FALSE}
> smoking <- read_csv()
> ```
>
> > ## Solution
> >

> > > ```{r ImportFullDataSolutionEcho, eval = FALSE}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> > ```{r ImportFullDataSolutionEcho, eval = TRUE}
```

This needs to be `TRUE` so that we read in the dataset.

> > smoking <- read_csv("data/smoking_cancer.csv")
> > ```
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

Let's take a look at the full dataset. We could use `View()`, the way we did for the smaller dataset, but if your data is too big, it might take too long to load. So let's just look at it in the console. Note that if you're working with something other than a tibble, you might have to use the `head()` function to take a look at the first few row, but when you print out a tibble it will just print out the first few lines:

> ```{r InitialExploration, eval = FALSE}

Reviewer: Hmm because we have this to `eval = FALSE` we don't see the first few lines on the website. Maybe change to `eval = TRUE`?

OR maybe we should actually move the description above about head etc. to the 1st dataset we read in, since that's where we talk about printing it out to the console. And then we don't have to re-explain View again here, we can just look at it in the console like we explained before.

Author: I kind of like it the way we have it now, so that we don't overwhelm everyone at the top. So I changed eval = TRUE.

```{r smokingLinePlotBad}
  ggplot(data = smoking) +
  aes(x = year, y = lung_cancer_pct, color = continent) +
    geom_line()
```

Hmm. This doesn't look right. By setting the color value to `continent`, we got a line that connects all the points for each continent. However,  we really wanted a line for each country. We need to tell ggplot that we want to connect the values for each `country` value instead. To do this, we need to use the `group=` aesthetic.

```{r smokingLinePlot}
  ggplot(data = smoking) +
  aes(x = year, y = lung_cancer_pct, group = country, color = continent) +
    geom_line()
```

Now, it's more straightforward to attribute patterns to individual countries within continents. Do you see any lines that might be outliers or interesting to look into? Are there parts of the plot that are still hard to see? Sometimes plots like this are called "spaghetti plots" because all the lines look like a bunch of wet noodles.

> ## Bonus Exercise: More line plots

> > Now create your own line plot comparing population and lung cancer rates! Looking at your plot, can you guess which two countries have experienced massive change in population from 1952-2007?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Now create your own line plot comparing population and lung cancer rates! Looking at your plot, can you guess which two countries have experienced massive change in population from 1990-2019?
```

>
> > ## Solution
> > ```{r smokingMoreLines}
> > ggplot(data = smoking) +
> >  aes(x = pop, y = lung_cancer_pct, group = country, color = continent) +
> >  geom_line()
> > ```

> > > (China and India are the two Asian countries that have experienced massive population growth from 1952-2007.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> > (China and India are the two Asian countries that have experienced massive population growth from 1990-2019.)
```

## Discrete Plots
_[Back to top](#contents)_

So far we've looked at two plot types (`geom_point` and `geom_line`) which work when both the x and y values are continuous. But sometimes one of your values may be discrete. 

We've previously used the discrete values of the `continent` column to color in our points and lines. But now let's try moving that variable to the `x` axis. Let's say we are curious about comparing the distribution of the lung cancer rates for each of the different continents for the `smoking` data. We can do so using a box plot. Try this out yourself in the exercise below!

> ## Box plots

> > Using the `smoking` data, use ggplot to create a box plot with continent on the x axis and lung cancer rates on the y axis. You can use the examples from earlier in the lesson as a template to remember how to pass ggplot data and map aesthetics and geometries onto the plot. If you're really stuck, feel free to use the internet as well!

Reviewer: Maybe we should use the `smoking_1990` dataset here? That will give us fewer points and it kind of feels more interpretable?

## Adding to plot objects
_[Back to top](#contents)_

In `ggplot2` you can store a plot in an object name and then add layers to the base plot. We're going to make a base plot with continent on the x axis and lung cancer rates on the y axis that we can add to, so we don't have to type out as much stuff:

```{r base_plot}
base_plot <- ggplot(data = smoking) +
  aes(x = continent, y = lung_cancer_pct)

> base_plot

Reviewer: I meant to ask you about making this base plot so it's less typing - let me know if you don't think it's a good idea, and feel free to modify if you'd like

Author: I went back and forth about it. It does make things easier from a teaching perspective. Though I think it might be a good idea to write out on the board/easel what base_plot is so that learners can always remember what to expect.

```

> So far we've only been adding one geom to each plot, but each plot object can actually contain multiple layers and each layer has it's own geom. Let's start with a basic boxplot:

Reviewer: I just realized this part is kind of early now because we first talk about color/fill and then go on to talk about layers. I think it'd be better to move this sentence a bit lower and introduce this in some other way (e.g. more generally what we're going to discuss next)

  geom_point()
```

The first time we made this plot, we colored the points differently for each of the continents. This time, let's draw a separate box for each continent. We can do this with `facet_wrap()`

```{r FacetWrap}
ggplot(data = smoking_1990) +
  aes(x = smoke_pct, y = lung_cancer_pct) +
  geom_point() +
  facet_wrap(vars(continent))
```
Now, it's easier to see the patterns within each continent.

Note that `facet_wrap` requires an extra helper function called `vars()` in order to pass in the column names. It's a lot like the `aes()` function, but it doesn't require an aesthetic name. We can see in this output that we get a separate box with a label for each continent so that only the points for that continent are in that box.

The other faceting function ggplot provides is `facet_grid()`. The main difference is that `facet_grid()` will make sure all of your smaller boxes share a common axis. In this example, we will put the boxes into columns side-by-side so that their y axes all line up.

```{r FacetGrid}
ggplot(data = smoking_1990) +
  aes(x = smoke_pct, y = lung_cancer_pct) +
  geom_point() +
  facet_grid(cols = vars(continent))

> ```

Reviewer: Explain the `cols` argument?

Pair up with another learner and discuss your data and what type of exploratory data analysis you would like to perform.

Questions to answer:

1. In 1-2 sentences, describe the information covered in your dataset.
2. How large is your dataset? How many rows? How many columns?

> 3. Write down 3 questions you could answer with your data set.

Reviewer: Should we be clearer about what types of questions we're thinking of? I think we want them to be 3 specific questions (that can be explored through a specific plot)?
 
```suggestion
3. Write down 3 specific questions you could answer with your data set.
```

> 4. How can you use visuals to explore those questions? Draw 3 plots out on paper. What will these plots show you?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. How can you use visuals to explore those questions? Draw at least 3 plots out on paper. What will these plots show you?
```

> 4. How can you use visuals to explore those questions? Draw 3 plots out on paper. What will these plots show you?

Reviewer: For the data viz presentation I'm trying to think of a step-by-step method to help people think through creating data visualizations. Here's what I've come up with so far:

1. Determine what question your goal/question is for the plot.
1. Identify the variables needed to answer your question. 
1. Choose an aesthetic for each variable based on importance.
1. Choose a geometry that allows you to use those aesthetics. 
1. Explore different aesthetic and geometry options.

Think some sort of outline like this would be useful for number 4?

> 5. Is your data in a format that can easily be read into R? How can you improve the formatting of the contents of the file? 

Reviewer: I think I included something like this originally, but I'm a bit worried that they'll go modifying the excel file, which we don't want. So maybe we should remove this one? 

We should also be clear in the worksheet that they shouldn't modify the excel file
